---
title:      Network File Server Performance in a University Environment - A Case Study (Thesis Proposal)
date:       1996-08-07 12:00:00
thumbnail:  /logos/
category:   publications
tags:       [publications, networks]
keywords:   
description:
---
Workloads of network file server disk IO subsystems have very different
characteristics than ob- served in timesharing or local IO systems
described in the literature. In this study, we provide a detailed
analysis of both disk and network workload traces collected from Novell
NetWare network file servers. We characterize file server disk and
network traffic and give insights into access pat- terns; we also
consider the relationship between network and disk throughput.
Measurements and statistics presented will aid designers and managers in
designing and tuning network file servers and their disk subsystems. Our
results can be used by analysts to parameterize synthetic models for
file server and server subsystem studies.

## Introduction
### Networks and Network File Servers

Local area network (LAN) file servers provide global file systems that
are shared by client worksta- tions. Novell NetWare is the most popular
file server operating system for personal computer LANs. Workstations
utilize NetWare’s global file system by submitting IO requests to a file
server using simple network protocols. The file server processes these
requests and replies to the workstations over the LAN.

Workstations use the global file system provided by the file server as
they would use a local file system, to store data and application
programs. Workstations may or may not have their own file system
resources. In the case of diskless workstations, the file server
provides all of a workstations’ file services, including its operating
system, application storage, data storage, and temporary (swap) space.
In the case of diskfull workstations, the file server provides a shared
disk resource among many workstations which have their own local file
systems.

For the global file system to be useful, the file server must provide
the performance and reliability of a local file system. For data
sharing, the server must provide adequate locking and synchronization
mechanisms to allow sharing of data between workstations.

The performance of the file server, in providing shared access to its
global file system, can be optimized in many ways. Using caching, the
file server retains, in volatile memory, file data recently accessed by
workstations. Read requests serviced from the file cache do not require
disk accesses, substantially reducing response time. Disk accesses for
write requests are postponed by using lazy- write caching. This reduces
the client request response time. File system performance can be
increased by increasing the size of this file cache and tuning cache
parameters. File servers dedicate a large portion of their memory for
file cache use.

Caches, found in disk subsystem adapters and disk controllers, also
improve the performance of the disk subsystem. Even with these
improvements, disk accesses remain an order of magnitude slower than
server file cache accesses. To obtain acceptable performance, most
client IO requests should be serviced from the server’s file cache.
Read-ahead, write-behind, and replacement algorithms have all been
implemented to realize this goal of increased performance.

...Read more in the [Full Text]({{"/publications/MSCS-Thesis.pdf"|prepend:site.filesurl}})

## Related Documents

* [Network File Server Performance in a University Environment - A Case Study (Proposal)]({% post_url /publications/1994-03-10-ms-thesis-proposal %})
* [MSCS Thesis Full Text (PDF)]({{"/publications/MSCS-Thesis.pdf"|prepend:site.filesurl}})
* [MSCS Thesis Proposal (PDF)]({{"/publications/MSCS-Thesis-Proposal.pdf"|prepend:site.filesurl}})
